hack/openshift/README.md, before:

# OpenShift Distribution Tools

Scripts that transform upstream bpfman-operator for Red Hat OpenShift.

## What these do

The scripts change upstream bundles to work in OpenShift:

- Replace Quay.io images with Red Hat registry images
- Add Red Hat branding to operator metadata
- Add architecture labels so OLM knows what platforms work (amd64, arm64, ppc64le, s390x)
- Add OpenShift-specific annotations for disconnected environments and FIPS

## Why here?

These scripts live in `hack/openshift/` because they're only used for Red Hat's downstream builds. They work with Konflux (Red Hat's build system) and don't affect upstream development.

## The scripts

### `update-bundle.py`
Changes the ClusterServiceVersion file to use Red Hat images and adds OpenShift metadata. Also builds the `relatedImages` section for disconnected environment support.

```bash
./hack/openshift/update-bundle.py \
  --csv-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-operator.clusterserviceversion.yaml \
  --image-pullspec <operator-image> \
  --csi-pullspec <csi-node-driver-registrar-image> \
  --version <version>
```

The `--csi-pullspec` argument is optional but recommended for building the `relatedImages` section that OLM uses for disconnected environments.

### `update-configmap.py`
Replaces image references in the ConfigMap with Red Hat registry images.

```bash
./hack/openshift/update-configmap.py \
  --configmap-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-config_v1_configmap.yaml \
  --agent-pullspec <agent-image> \
  --bpfman-pullspec <daemon-image>
```


### `OPENSHIFT-VERSION`
Contains build-time configuration for OpenShift builds:

- `BUILDVERSION` - Operator version for CSV metadata
- `CSI_NODE_DRIVER_REGISTRAR_IMAGE` - Red Hat CSI image SHA-pinned reference (we don't build this image)

```bash
BUILDVERSION=0.6.0
CSI_NODE_DRIVER_REGISTRAR_IMAGE=registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-csi-node-driver-registrar-rhel9@sha256:...
```

The Containerfiles read these values at build time using `--build-arg-file OPENSHIFT-VERSION`. The CSI image is a Red Hat-provided image, not built by Konflux, so it's SHA-pinned here for security and reproducibility.

### `Makefile`
Test the transformations locally:
- `build-operator-container` - Build operator container with Red Hat CSI image
- `transform-bundle` - Test bundle transformation
- `transform-bundle-container` - Build bundle container with transformations
- `transform-configmap` - Test ConfigMap transformation
- `generate-rpm-lockfile` - Generate rpms.lock.yaml for Konflux builds
- `format` - Format Python files with Black
- `format-check` - Check Python formatting

## How Konflux uses these

### Image files
Konflux updates these files in `konflux/images/` when new images are built:

- `bpfman-operator.txt` - Operator image
- `bpfman-agent.txt` - Agent image
- `bpfman.txt` - Daemon image

The `.tekton` pipelines know about these files through `build-nudge-files` annotations.

### During builds
Container builds read the image references from those files:

```dockerfile
RUN hack/openshift/update-bundle.py \
    --csv-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-operator.clusterserviceversion.yaml \
    --image-pullspec "$(cat hack/openshift/konflux/images/bpfman-operator.txt)"
```

This way Konflux can update images without changing the build scripts.

## Testing locally

Run the transformations without building containers:

```bash
# Show available targets
make

# Run specific transformations
make transform-bundle
make transform-configmap
```

From the project root:

```bash
make -C hack/openshift/ transform-bundle
```

Or run the scripts directly:

```bash
# Bundle transformation
hack/openshift/update-bundle.py \
  --csv-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-operator.clusterserviceversion.yaml \
  --image-pullspec "$(cat hack/openshift/konflux/images/bpfman-operator.txt)" \
  --version "$(grep BUILDVERSION OPENSHIFT-VERSION | cut -d= -f2)"

# ConfigMap transformation
hack/openshift/update-configmap.py \
  --configmap-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-config_v1_configmap.yaml \
  --agent-pullspec "$(cat hack/openshift/konflux/images/bpfman-agent.txt)" \
  --bpfman-pullspec "$(cat hack/openshift/konflux/images/bpfman.txt)"
```

Commit message:

Extend relatedImages with operator, agent, and bpfman images
Add support for including all component images in the bundle CSV's
relatedImages section for complete disconnected environment support.
OLM uses this section to determine which images need to be mirrored.

Also rename transform-bundle-container to build-bundle-container for
consistency with build-operator-container, keeping a legacy alias.

hack/openshift/README.md, after:

# OpenShift Distribution Tools

Scripts that transform upstream bpfman-operator for Red Hat OpenShift.

## What these do

The scripts change upstream bundles to work in OpenShift:

- Replace Quay.io images with Red Hat registry images
- Add Red Hat branding to operator metadata
- Add architecture labels so OLM knows what platforms work (amd64, arm64, ppc64le, s390x)
- Add OpenShift-specific annotations for disconnected environments and FIPS

## Why here?

These scripts live in `hack/openshift/` because they're only used for Red Hat's downstream builds. They work with Konflux (Red Hat's build system) and don't affect upstream development.

## The scripts

### `update-bundle.py`
Changes the ClusterServiceVersion file to use Red Hat images and adds OpenShift metadata. Also builds the `relatedImages` section for disconnected environment support.

```bash
./hack/openshift/update-bundle.py \
  --csv-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-operator.clusterserviceversion.yaml \
  --image-pullspec <operator-image> \
  --agent-pullspec <agent-image> \
  --bpfman-pullspec <bpfman-image> \
  --csi-pullspec <csi-node-driver-registrar-image> \
  --version <version>
```

The `--agent-pullspec`, `--bpfman-pullspec`, and `--csi-pullspec` arguments are optional but recommended for building the `relatedImages` section that OLM uses for disconnected environments.

### `update-configmap.py`
Replaces image references in the ConfigMap with Red Hat registry images.

```bash
./hack/openshift/update-configmap.py \
  --configmap-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-config_v1_configmap.yaml \
  --agent-pullspec <agent-image> \
  --bpfman-pullspec <daemon-image>
```


### `OPENSHIFT-VERSION`
Contains build-time configuration for OpenShift builds:

- `BUILDVERSION` - Operator version for CSV metadata
- `CSI_NODE_DRIVER_REGISTRAR_IMAGE` - Red Hat CSI image SHA-pinned reference (we don't build this image)

```bash
BUILDVERSION=0.6.0
CSI_NODE_DRIVER_REGISTRAR_IMAGE=registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-csi-node-driver-registrar-rhel9@sha256:...
```

The Containerfiles read these values at build time using `--build-arg-file OPENSHIFT-VERSION`. The CSI image is a Red Hat-provided image, not built by Konflux, so it's SHA-pinned here for security and reproducibility.

### `Makefile`
Test the transformations locally:
- `build-operator-container` - Build operator container with Red Hat CSI image
- `build-bundle-container` - Build bundle container with transformations
- `transform-bundle` - Test bundle transformation
- `transform-configmap` - Test ConfigMap transformation
- `generate-rpm-lockfile` - Generate rpms.lock.yaml for Konflux builds
- `format` - Format Python files with Black
- `format-check` - Check Python formatting

## How Konflux uses these

### Image files
Konflux updates these files in `konflux/images/` when new images are built:

- `bpfman-operator.txt` - Operator image
- `bpfman-agent.txt` - Agent image
- `bpfman.txt` - Daemon image

The `.tekton` pipelines know about these files through `build-nudge-files` annotations.

### During builds
Container builds read the image references from those files:

```dockerfile
RUN hack/openshift/update-bundle.py \
    --csv-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-operator.clusterserviceversion.yaml \
    --image-pullspec "$(cat hack/openshift/konflux/images/bpfman-operator.txt)"
```

This way Konflux can update images without changing the build scripts.

## Testing locally

Run the transformations without building containers:

```bash
# Show available targets
make

# Run specific transformations
make transform-bundle
make transform-configmap
```

From the project root:

```bash
make -C hack/openshift/ transform-bundle
```

Or run the scripts directly:

```bash
# Bundle transformation
hack/openshift/update-bundle.py \
  --csv-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-operator.clusterserviceversion.yaml \
  --image-pullspec "$(cat hack/openshift/konflux/images/bpfman-operator.txt)" \
  --version "$(grep BUILDVERSION OPENSHIFT-VERSION | cut -d= -f2)"

# ConfigMap transformation
hack/openshift/update-configmap.py \
  --configmap-file bundle/manifests/bpfman-config_v1_configmap.yaml \
  --agent-pullspec "$(cat hack/openshift/konflux/images/bpfman-agent.txt)" \
  --bpfman-pullspec "$(cat hack/openshift/konflux/images/bpfman.txt)"
```
